[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
ERIC DEMAINE: All right,
let's get started.
Welcome back to 6.1200.
I am the second of the three
lecturers in this class.
You can call me Eric.
And Brynmor will
be on next week.
So today we are going to
continue our theme of induction
and prove some even cooler and
stronger forms of induction.
Just a recap of where
we were last time,
as we've seen, we're growing
our catalog of different proof
techniques of how to prove
different types of theorems,
almost by like a cookbook.
If you want to cook this,
here's how you get started.
And so here's a brief
summary of this.
If the theorem you want
to prove starts with,
"there exists something," then
a natural way to prove that is
by example or by construction.
You construct a particular x
star and prove that P of x star
is true.
And if you can do
that, then you've
proved that there exists
an x, where P of x is true.
It's straightforward,
but it lets you unwrap--
if I give you an expression
that starts with "exists,"
then you know your first step
is try to figure out an x where
this is true.
And of course, to prove
P of x star you probably
recursively use this cookbook.
If you want to
prove a universal,
one common way-- if you want to
prove for all x, P of x is true,
typically your first line
is take an arbitrary x.
Just give it a name, x.
And then prove that P
of x is true no matter
what x you started with.
Therefore, it's true
for all of them.
Come back to
induction in a second.
If the main thing you want
to prove is an implication,
P implies Q, this
is if P then Q.
And I want to remind
you that P implies
Q is the same thing as not P or
Q. We'll use this a bunch today.
Then the direct
way to prove this,
what we call a direct
argument, is assume P is true,
and then prove Q is true.
Because this
implication, we only
need to prove that Q
is true when P is true.
If P, then Q.
Or another way to prove that
same statement, P implies Q,
is what's called
the contrapositive.
It turns out P implies Q is
the same statement-- it's
equivalent to not Q
implies not P. Remember,
this symbol is a negation.
Flip true and false.
So to do that with
a direct argument,
we would prove that if not Q
is true, then not P is true.
In other words, assume not
Q, and then prove not P.
This may seem magical.
Why is P implies Q the same
as not Q implies not P?
But it actually follows
directly from this equivalence.
If you look at not Q implies not
P, this is the same thing as--
let me go over here-- not
not Q or not P, all right,
because it implies--
it's the same thing as taking
an or if you negate the first--
the part on the left.
And not not Q is
the same as Q, OK?
So this was not Q implies not
P. It's the same thing as.
This is the same thing as this.
And that is exactly this just by
switching the order of the ORs.
And so P implies Q is the same
thing as not Q implies not P.
So that was contrapositive.
There was a related
notion of contradiction,
where if you want to
prove any statement P,
you assume that not P is true
and then find a contradiction.
Prove that in fact
false is true,
or something is
both true and false.
All these things
are very, very bad
because we assume that
our axioms are consistent.
And so if you can prove false,
that means that what you assumed
must also be false.
And so if not P is false,
that's the same thing
as saying P is true.
It feels very backwards.
Lots of double
negatives in there.
But that's the nature
of contradiction.
We try to avoid
them when we can,
but sometimes it's really the
right way to prove something.
And the last technique
we saw was induction,
where if we have a
universal quantifier
over the natural numbers,
we want to prove P of n
is true for all natural
numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on,
then we only need to prove it
for some base case, P of 0.
And then we need to prove
that P of n implies P of n
plus 1 for all n.
So we'll talk more about
induction in a little bit.
Today we're going to add to this
list two more proof techniques.
One is proof by cases, and
the other is strong induction.
So proof by cases is just
a nice general technique
to be aware of.
It can be very powerful.
Strong induction is going
to be an even cooler
form of induction.
All right, but we'll start
today with proof by cases.
And we'll start with
proof by 2 cases.
And then we'll generalize
to more than two cases.
So the idea is take
any proposition C,
and observe that C or not C is a
tautology, meaning always true.
If C is true, then this whole
thing is true because C is true.
If C is false,
then not C is true.
And so this whole thing is true.
I'm going to remind you
this V symbol is an "or."
Whereas, the opposite
symbol is an "and."
I think the mnemonic here is
this looks like a letter A. This
looks like a letter O. I've
heard some people say this looks
like a lowercase r for "or."
Anyway, you just
remember these things.
This is "or."
This is "and."
So C or not C is the question,
though, is always true.
So we call it a tautology, fancy
word for being always true.
And so what this tells us
is that our proposition P--
let's say we want to prove P--
is equivalent to C or not C
implies P. So this is saying
if C or not C, then P is true.
C or not C is just always true.
So this is saying if true--
in other words always--
P better be true.
So P and this implication
are equivalent.
Another way to see that is
to rewrite this implication
as a negation.
So this is like
saying not true or P.
And so that's just the same
thing as P because this is true.
OK.
Cool.
So I want to rewrite
this a little bit
and say this thing is equivalent
to C implies P and not C implies
P.
Why is this true?
It's like a distributive law.
This is saying I want to
prove that C implies P,
and I want to prove
that not C implies P.
That's what I wrote over there.
That implies that the
combination of C and not C
implies P. OK, so I claim
these are equivalent.
One way to verify it is
with the truth table,
or you can do it with
some manipulation.
All right, so we have--
what this is saying
is in order to prove
P we need to prove that
P is true assuming C
and prove that P is
true assuming not C.
And these are the two
cases in a proof by cases.
Let me write out a
little template for you.
Let's suppose the
theorem we want
to prove is P. Theorem
means something that's true
and that we're about to prove.
And so we usually say proof
by cases on the truth value.
Of C. So this is for any.
Statement C. Proposition is
what the word I was looking for.
Any Proposition C, it's
either true or false.
And so we're going to do proof
by cases on the truth value
of C. Case 1 is that C is true.
And case 2 is that C is false.
And so what do we
do in each case?
Well, in the case
that C is true,
this means that we get
to assume that C is true.
And then use that to
prove that P is true.
And so the missing step in this
proof outline or this template
is we need to say P is true
because some reasons, which
we need to fill in.
And similarly, in
the C is false case,
we need to prove P is
true for some reasons.
So we need twice
as many reasons,
but the idea is that
maybe assuming C is true
makes it easier to
prove P is true.
Maybe also assuming C
is false makes it easier
to prove that P is true.
So in these boxes
here we get to use C.
And in here, we
get to use not C.
And often, this
makes proofs easier.
But the challenging
part is to pick
the correct C. What's the right
choice of C for this to be true?
And maybe one more line I want
to add to this template, which
is pretty obvious in
the setting but gets
much less obvious when you
think about more than two cases.
So a final step in
this proof would
be to say C is either true or
false because all propositions
are either true or false.
And so the cases are exhaustive.
So this is also called
a proof by exhaustion
because we're really tired.
Maybe we are also.
But the idea is we want to
exhaust all possible cases.
And if we prove that we captured
every possible situation and all
of them P is true,
then we're done.
So that's what we'd like to do.
I'm going to give
you two examples.
First one is very simple.
The second one is
more interesting.
Questions?
All right.
So the claim is, this is a
general fact, that A implies B
or B implies C is a tautology.
So this means it's always true.
Again, so you can rewrite
this as for all A,
B, and C, which are
either true or false,
we have that A implies B
or B implies C is true.
OK.
Fun facts.
Let's prove it.
And the proof
technique we're going
to use by cases, by two
cases, namely, on B. B
is either true or false.
We could try to do a case
analysis in terms of A
or in terms of C. It turns out
B is the right answer here.
It will lead to
the fewest cases.
We'll only need two,
intuitively because B is
in both of these expressions.
So it seems good to split
on B because it will
impact this one and this one.
OK.
So case 1 is that B is true.
If B is true, I claim
that A implies B is true,
which is this first half.
Why?
In other words, I claim that
A implies true is a tautology.
I think another-- again,
an easy way to see this
is to rewrite this implication
as not the left-hand side
or the right-hand
side, not A or true.
Well, that's just true.
True or anything is true.
So in particular,
over here, not A or B
is true because we just
assumed that B is true.
So this tells us that A implies
B, or anything, in particular B
or C, is also true.
So kind of trivial, right?
If you assume B is true,
then, of course, this is true.
And so, of course, the
whole thing is true.
So easy when you have
the correct case.
Let's think about
the other case.
It's not enough to just
have one half of the cases.
We also need to think
about when B is false.
When B is false, I claim
that the other term is true.
I claim that B
implies C is true.
This is maybe a
little less intuitive.
This is saying
that false implies
C is a tautology, like for
any C, false implies it.
And this should eventually
become intuitive for you
when you get used to
implies and if then.
This is saying if false,
which means never,
I need C to be true.
But if this condition
is never true,
then I don't care about
the right-hand side.
If it's if-- if pigs
fly, then, I don't know,
apples are orange or something.
That's a true statement
because it will never
be the case that pigs fly, or
at least in the present time.
So another way to see that
is to think about, again,
not B or C. B is false.
So not B is true.
And so, of course,
true or C is also true.
And so that tells us
that anything or B
implies C is also true.
So in other words,
this statement,
which maybe I'll call P, I'll
say in either case P is true.
And so I write my little
end of proof symbol.
This is QED from last time.
This means that I have
demonstrated the theorem.
Cool.
So in one case, this
part was trivial.
In the other case, this part was
trivial because it's an "or."
We're happy in either
case, and we've
done our first proof by cases.
Pretty straightforward.
Let's do a more
surprising result
using proof by cases called
mutual friends and strangers.
This is actually a famous
mathematical problem.
We're going to solve today a
particular case of it, which
is suppose you have six people.
And every two of them are
either friends or not.
And this is an exclusive or,
so I'm going to write XOR.
You're allowed to be friends
or not friends, not both,
and not neither.
And in the not
friends case, I'm also
going to call them strangers.
So this is like
extreme friendship.
Either you declare
yourself as friends
or as knowing each other, or
you don't know each other.
In that case, you're strangers.
You're just never both, and
it's always one or the other.
So you can think
of this as I can
draw a little picture of there
are six people represented
by circles.
You can put smiley faces
in them if you want.
And maybe I connect
them via a white line
if they are friends and a dotted
line if they're strangers.
So let's-- and every two of them
have one of these two pictures.
Probably missing some.
Here.
OK, that's them all.
Then I claim no matter
what the situation is,
which ones are friends,
which ones are strangers,
there's always either three
mutual friends or three
mutual strangers.
OK.
In this example--
hopefully I drew enough.
Yeah.
These three people
are mutual strangers.
They're connected by a
triangle of dashed lines, OK?
If I drew some other pattern, if
they were all solid lines, then
I might get the other situation,
at least three mutual friends.
But it turns out, if
you have six people,
they're always at least
three mutual friends
or three mutual strangers.
Let's prove this by cases.
Whenever we apply
a proof by cases,
we need to come up with
some proposition C that's
either true or false, well,
for a proof by two cases, which
this will be.
And it's a little work
in this case to do it.
It turns out a useful first
step is to pick any person P. So
just take the first
person or the seventh--
or the fifth person out of six.
Doesn't matter which
one, but label it P.
So now we have a
person to talk about.
This is like the proof by
example or by construction,
right?
Overall there, we want
to prove an existence.
We want to prove existence
of three mutual friends
or existence of three
mutual strangers.
So that's a useful step
to either construct one.
Or in this case, we're actually
not doing much for construction.
We're just taking
an arbitrary x.
But that will be enough
for this problem.
So let me draw a
little circle for P.
And it might have
some friends, and it
might have some strangers.
OK.
How many of these lines
coming out of P are there?
Five exactly because there
are six people total.
P is one of them.
So there are five
people over here, OK?
So turns out useful
case strategy is
to say either P has at
least three friends,
or it has less than
three friends, right?
Either there are three solid
lines, like I've drawn here,
or there are at least three--
or there are at most
two solid lines.
OK.
Let's think about
this first case.
P has at least three friends.
Let's give them a name,
Q, R, and S. So that's
a general picture.
Now we're assuming P has three
solid lines to three people
Q, R, and S. OK.
This is not yet a triangle.
We haven't solved
the problem yet.
But if we break into more
cases we'll be able to.
So case 1A is going to be some
two of Q, R, and S are friends.
Suppose, for example,
Q and S are friends.
Have I found a triangle?
Yes, P, Q, and S are mutual
friends if this edge is here.
Or if this edge is here,
then these three people
are three mutual friends.
Or if this edge is here, these
three people or mutual friends.
If there's any edge in
here that I can draw,
any solid line between Q, R, and
S, then those two people plus P
form three mutual friends.
So that case is actually easy.
Great.
Then P plus those two people
are three mutual friends, OK,
which was situation one up here.
There's always either
three mutual friends
or three mutual strangers.
OK.
So now we need to think
about the other cases.
Let's go over here.
We found one case that was
easy, but there's case 1B,
which is maybe there
aren't two mutual friends.
And there's case
two, where P does not
have at least three friends.
But it turns out all of
these cases will be easy.
So let's do case 1B.
Now, I get to freely
choose what case 1 was,
and I get to freely choose what
case 1A was because whenever I
split into cases, I get to
choose my proposition C to be
anything I want.
So this was C in the first case.
This was C in the second case.
But generally, if you're
doing proof by two cases,
you have no choice
at this point.
So case 1A was whatever.
Case 1B has to be
the negation of this.
So case 1B literally is not
some 2 of Q, R, S are friends.
But if you think about
that for a little bit
this is saying Q, R, and S--
let me write this in
a couple of steps.
No two of Q, R,
and S are friends.
But that's the same
thing as saying Q, R,
and S are mutual strangers.
OK.
We're using this fact,
or this assumption,
that every two people are either
friends or strangers, always one
or the other.
So if there's no solid line
over here, then all of these
are dashed lines.
So all three of these
are mutual strangers.
And there we found our
triangle of strangers, OK?
So it turns out case 1A and case
1B are actually just as easy
just reversed.
So this was situation two.
So either we got
three mutual friends,
or we got three
mutual strangers.
But we're still inside case 1.
We just finished case 1.
Now we need to
think about case 2.
So I'm going to unindent
here and go to case 2.
Case 2, again, has to be
exactly the opposite of this.
So P does not have at
least three friends.
By number of people
being an integer,
this is saying P has
at most two friends.
If it doesn't have at
least three, it's at most 2
because the number of
friends is always an integer.
OK.
Great.
So case 2 is a
negation of case 1.
And it turns out
that is also kind of
easy for asymmetric reason.
Remember, there are
six people total.
So there's P and five others.
So how many strangers is P with?
How many people is
P a stranger to?
Well, it's at least all
the others, 5 minus 2.
Because at most two
of them are friends.
The remainder have
to be strangers.
And so this is 3.
So P having at most two
friends is the same thing
as P having at least
three strangers
because there are five
other people total.
2 plus 3 is 5.
So case 2 is P has at
least three strangers.
Case 1 was P has at
least three friends.
These are almost the same.
I just have to flip
friends versus strangers.
So the way I would
write this in a proof
is this is symmetric
to case 1 swapping
friends versus strangers.
And of course, situation
1 with situation 2.
So case 2 would be P has at
least three strangers, Q, R,
and S. Case 1A is that some two
of Q, R, and S are strangers.
Then we conclude
that P plus those two
are three mutual strangers,
which is situation 2.
Or case 2B would be no two
of Q, R, S are strangers.
In other words., Q, R,
S are mutual friends.
And then we're in situation 1.
So case 2 works just like case 1
just swapping the words friends
and strangers because they
didn't really have any meaning.
They were just words.
Cool.
So in all cases, we
prove the desired result.
Either situation 1 or
situation 2 happens.
This is a particular case of
something called Ramsey Theory.
What we've just found is
that something called R of 3,
3 is at most 6.
In general, R of f
comma S is the number
of people you need
in order to guarantee
that there's at least f friends
or at least S strangers.
So we just did at
least three friends
or at least three strangers.
We showed that six
people was enough.
It turns out six people is
exactly the right number.
You need six people in order to
guarantee at least three friends
or three strangers.
If you wanted to guarantee
four friends or four strangers,
turns out you need 18 people.
If you want to guarantee five
friends or five strangers,
turns out you need somewhere
between 43 and 48 people.
But we don't know how many.
So while this problem
was relatively easy,
three friends or three
strangers, five friends
and five strangers already is an
unsolved mathematical problem.
So that's kind of cool
and crazy how easily you
get to very difficult problems.
Of course, people will try to
compute larger numbers too,
but we don't have tight
bounds, generally.
OK.
I want to say one
more thing about proof
by cases, which is what if
we want more than two cases?
So more generally,
proof by k cases.
So instead of just C
or not C, let's suppose
we have a bunch of
propositions, C1 through Ck.
And let's suppose that
this is a tautology,
my favorite word for the day.
So suppose that it's always the
case, C1 or C2 or dot, dot, dot,
or Ck.
One of these things
is always true.
Then we can follow
this template which
is suppose we want to prove a
theorem that some proposition
P is true.
Then we'll say a proof by
cases, and there's k of them.
So I'm just going to
write it generically.
In case i, is that Ci is true.
In other words, we get
to assume Ci is true.
And then what we need
to do is prove that P
is true in that scenario.
And P is true because reasons.
And then here it's
especially important
to say that the cases are
exhaustive because reasons.
And exhaustive here just means
that C1 or C2 or up to Ck
is a tautology.
So you need to
prove that C1 or--
dot, dot, dot, or
Ck is always true.
That's the meaning of the
cases being exhaustive.
So there's two parts.
One is to prove that
each case is OK.
The other is to prove that
those cases cover everything.
So I won't show an
example of k cases here.
We'll see them in
recitation, and so on.
But I will tell you a story
about one famous proof by cases,
which is the Four Color Theorem.
I'll illustrate the Four
Color Theorem with an example.
So here's a map of
the United States.
And I've colored all the
states, all the regions
of this map with four
different colors,
red, green, blue,
yellow, in such a way
that if you have two
regions that share
a positive length boundary,
then this color A is
different from this color
B. It has to be not equal.
Otherwise, if you had two red
regions next to each other
it would be hard to
see the boundary.
So the colors illustrate
the boundaries
between all the regions.
Four colors seems to
be enough for this map.
It's also enough for this
map of all the countries.
Is it true for all the maps?
Turns out, yes, this is called--
for a long time it was called
the Four Color Conjecture.
And then it became the Four
Color Theorem at some date.
So Four Color
Theorem says you can
color the regions of any
planar map with four colors
so that neighboring regions
get different colors.
This was first observed
and conjectured in 1852
by a guy named Guthrie, who
was a student of De Morgan.
De Morgan, I think, his name
will come up in a moment,
famous logician.
He actually invented
induction as we--
one of the first
people to-- he invented
the term mathematical
induction, at the very least,
and really made it more formal.
So a student of him,
Guthrie, said, hey,
I took all the
counties of England.
And it turned out I
only needed four colors.
Is this a theorem?
And he asked
indirectly De Morgan.
And De Morgan said,
hey, seems cool.
I don't know, maybe.
Then the following year,
1853, another mathematician
named Kempe proves the theorem.
But proved should be in
quotes because 11 years
later, 1864, Heawood
found a bug in that proof.
Turns out there were a lot
of cases in this proof,
and the cases were
not exhaustive.
So it wasn't done.
Then, 15 years later, 1880,
Tait proved the theorem.
Then 11 years later, Petersen
found a bug in that proof.
Again, not all the
cases were exhaustive.
Then, 85 years later,
1976, Appel and Haken--
or maybe it's Appel,
I'm not sure--
proved the theorem.
And I think most people
consider this an actual proof.
But it's a little tricky.
Just to give you a
sense, this is where my--
I started hearing
about the problem.
I wasn't alive in 1976, but
I heard about it later on.
There are 1,834
cases in this proof.
They occupy about a 400-page
printout from a computer
program.
And so this is one of the
first mathematical proofs
that used a computer to assist
in checking all the cases.
Because there's so many, 1,834,
it's hard to do that by hand
and be sure that you
didn't make a mistake.
So the computer proof, to me,
is a little bit more sound.
Also apparently checked by
hand by Haken's daughter.
Then, five years
later, Schmidt found
what you could interpret
as a bug in this proof,
let's say an omission
or something,
but a missing situation.
And then over the
next eight years,
Appel and Haken fixed all
the bugs they could find,
that one and some other
wording issues, and so on.
And then they
published it in a book.
But a book isn't refereed, so I
don't know how many people have
read that book.
It seems like this
proof is maybe correct.
It's been many years, and
no one has found a bug.
A little bit later,
though, in 1996,
Robertson, Sanders,
Seymour, and Thomas,
some of the top graph
theorists in the world,
found a simpler proof.
That proof only has 633 cases.
So that's a lot less, maybe
three times fewer cases.
And also, the
length of the paper
is shorter, maybe
10 times shorter.
So that's progress.
But is that proof true?
It also used a computer
to check the cases.
Finally, in 2005,
Werner and Gonthier
developed a fully
computer-checkable proof using
a system called Coq,
where you write down
every step in the proof.
And then the computer
just has to check
that every mathematical
derivation, all the derivations
we saw last class, modus
ponens, and all those things,
are correct.
This program has withstood
many, many years of scrutiny.
So we all believe
that it's correct.
And so the fact that you
can write the entire proof
in this proof language
suggests that this really is
a true theorem now, thankfully.
There won't be
more missing cases.
I believe that is just an
implementation of the Robertson
proof.
So that one withstood scrutiny.
But it's very tedious
to write these proofs.
And so for the Four Color
Theorem, it's worth it,
I would say.
All right, so that's just
an example of, in general,
proofs by cases can
involve a zillion cases.
It's very annoying,
but sometimes that's
the best thing we
know how to do.
Maybe we'll come up with a
simpler Four Color Theorem proof
at some point, but best we know
so far has hundreds of cases.
All right, let's go
back to induction.
At first I want to review
induction a little bit,
and then we will get
a stronger form of it.
So I'm going to call
this the induction axiom.
This is what we talked
about last class.
We didn't call it an axiom.
And in some setups
it is an axiom.
We're going to take
it as one, something
that we just assume is true.
Although, as Zach
mentioned, in modern times,
you usually prove
this using other--
using the definition
of the natural numbers.
But I'll just take it
as something is true.
So for any predicate P of
n over the natural numbers,
if on the one hand P of 0 is
true and on the other hand,
P of n implies P of n plus
1 for all natural numbers n,
then P of n is true for
all natural numbers n.
This is the magic of induction.
You should use this
probably in every problem
you solve, not every problem,
but extremely powerful tool.
We're going to use it all the
time throughout this class.
I want to give you a
visual way of thinking
about what's going on
with induction, which
I call block diagrams.
So I'm going to
think of a block,
like a little box here,
that takes as input--
think of it as a procedure.
You give it some true
propositions on the left,
and it produces a true
proposition on the right.
OK.
Or we could think of
it as if I give you
some proofs of
these propositions,
then this block will
give you a proof
of a proposition on the right.
So what's going
on with induction
is we're given two of
these blocks, these two.
So you can think of
part 1, P of 0 is true,
as a block that has no input.
So this is what we normally
call the base case.
So it doesn't need
to assume anything.
And it just produces for you
a proof that P of 0 is true.
And the second part
here, the induction step,
says that if you can
prove P of n is true
and you plug it into
the induction step,
then it will give you a proof
that P of n plus 1 is true.
Saw a bunch of examples
of this last time.
We assume P of n, and we use
that to prove P of n plus 1, OK?
Now, the cool thing about
blocks is you can just
chain them together.
So if we chain, the only
block we can place first
is this base case because
it doesn't need anything
to get started.
So we start with the
base case argument.
That produces P of 0.
Now we plug this into the step.
This step has to work for all n.
So in particular, it
works for n equals 0.
And so we plug that into the
step, and we get a P of 1.
We plug P of 1 into the
step, so n equals 1.
Then we get P of n
plus 1, namely, P of 2.
And we plug that into the step,
and we get P of 3, and so on.
So this just gives
you some intuition
for if I can build an argument
for why P of 0 is true
and I can build an
argument for why if P of n
is true, then P of n
plus 1 is also true,
then I can just repeat
that argument over
and over with different n,
increasing n by 1 each time.
And I can use that to prove that
all the P of n's are true, OK?
This is visual intuition
for why this works.
Of course, we're not
going to actually prove
P of n is true for
all n, but should
be pretty intuitive from that.
Or more abstractly, you can
actually think of induction
itself as one of these blocks.
Let me use another color.
So we have, on the
one hand a block base
which produces P of 0.
And we have an induction
step, which given P of n,
produces P of n plus 1.
So I'm going to think of
this as a thing that's true
and this as a thing that's true.
And then what
induction gives me,
induction is a block that,
given these two facts--
if you can prove
each of these things,
then it gives me a new fact,
which is for all natural numbers
n, P of n is true.
So that's the--
instead of having
to draw out this
infinite length path,
induction just does
it all at once.
It says, oh, I know I can chain
these all together forever.
Therefore P of n is
true for all n, OK?
I don't know if that helps,
but it's another visual way
of thinking about induction.
Let's--
All right, let me tell you
another equivalent formulation
of induction, which I prefer.
It starts out the same.
Suppose P of 0 is true.
The induction step I'm going
to phrase slightly differently,
almost the same.
For all n at least one P of
n minus 1 implies P of n.
Then, for all natural
numbers, P of n.
So the first and last
lines are the same.
We assume P of 0 is true.
We're going to conclude P of n
is true for all natural numbers.
Here we started at 0, and we
wanted to show that P of n
implies P of n plus 1.
Over here, we're
starting at 1 and we're
proving that P of n
minus 1 implies P of n.
These are exactly
the same things.
I've just shifted
the indices by one.
So these are
identical statements,
or equivalent statements.
I like this version.
In particular, it will
lead into strong induction.
But I like this version
as a computer scientist
because I always want to think
about-- what I want to prove
P of n, not P of n plus 1.
It's confusing to think
about proving P of n plus 1.
I always want to prove P of n.
When n equals 0, OK,
that's my base case.
I proved that specially.
When n is at least 1,
I'm not in the base case,
and I get to assume that
P of n minus 1 is true.
You can think of this
like a computer program.
Think of a-- proving P of n
is like running a computation
f of n, or P of n.
And I get to recursively
call P of n minus 1
in order to compute P
of n. n is given to me.
This is the one I want to solve.
If n is 0, then I
solve it one way.
If n is bigger than
0 or at least 1,
then I recursively call P of n
minus 1 or depend on that proof
and use it to prove P of n.
But you can use
either one, whichever
is more comfortable to you.
But really, you
should use neither,
and you should use this stronger
form called strong induction.
So let's do that.
Strong induction just gives
you more to work with.
So it's in some
sense more powerful.
Logically, it's
identical to induction.
You can actually prove it using
induction, and we'll do that.
Let me first state the theorem.
So if for any natural
number this is true,
then for any natural
number P of n is true, OK?
Let me bring this
one down to compare.
So first thing
maybe to notice is
that it doesn't seem
to be a base case
here, which is a little weird.
It's just one
condition then this.
Let's compare the
steps, first of all.
Or I guess let's
think about the case--
this has to be true for all n.
If we think about when n equals
0, that's the missing base
case, what this is actually
saying is P0 up to P minus 1
implies P of 0.
So this is kind
of weird notation.
I'm abusing the dot, dot,
dot a little bit here.
And for when n equals
1, this is P of 0.
When n equals 2, this
is P of 0 and P of 1.
When n equals 3, for larger n
it's very clear what this dot,
dot, dot means.
But when n equals
0 it's confusing.
So I need to specify.
This is defined to be
true for n equals 0, OK?
So for n equals 0
what you have to do
is prove that true
implies P of 0.
In other words, P of 0 must
be true in all cases, OK?
So there's-- but
then for larger n,
what this is saying is not only
do I get to assume P of n minus
1, but I get to assume all
the P of i's before P of n.
So I would normally say P of i
is true for all i less than n.
This is what I get to assume.
That's probably actually a
better way to state this thing.
So with regular
induction here, I
got to assume that the previous
P of n minus 1 was true,
and I needed to use that to
prove that P of n is true.
But actually, if you
look at this chain,
by the time I'm proving P of
3, I've already proved all
the smaller Pi's.
So why not assume that.
With strong induction,
I get to assume that.
In order to prove P
of n, I get to assume
all the Pi's where
i is less than n.
Now, when n equals 0, I
don't get to assume anything
because there are
no smaller i's.
But when I get to P of 5, I get
to assume P0, P1, P2, P3, P4.
So I get to assume more, so
this only makes my proof easier.
OK.
To be clear, this is
usually proved in cases.
Normally, you need
to check 0 specially.
That might be a base case.
Maybe you have to
check 1 specially.
It depends on your
implication argument.
Often, this implication assumes
that n is at least something,
and then you have to
prove all the smaller
n's to be true specially.
But we'll get to
examples in a moment.
What I'd like to do
first is actually
prove that strong
induction is true.
This is not something you
would repeat in your homework.
You should just assume
strong induction is true.
But I think it's
instructive to see
why it's true as yet another
example of induction.
So we're going to use regular
induction, this version,
or actually, I think this
version, the induction axiom,
to prove strong induction, OK?
Now, this is a
situation where we
need to define a particular
induction hypothesis that's
not the obvious one.
And this is not at all obvious.
But I'm going to define
ih of n to be this P of 0
and P of n minus 1.
In other words, for all
i less than n, P of i.
I like that better
because it works even when
n is 0 because there
are no i's less than 0.
So that's just true when n is 0.
So this is the thing I
want to prove for all n.
And how do we do it?
Well, as usual, with an
induction, we have a base case.
Base case is ih of 0.
So ih of 0 is actually
literally just true
because we defined
it to be that way.
We say when n equals 0,
this dot, dot, dot is true.
Or you could say--
this is saying for
all i less than 0,
where i is a natural number.
But there are no natural
numbers less than 0,
so this is like saying
if false, then something.
And that's just always true.
So this is, by definition,
ih of 0 is true.
Great?
Easy base case as usual.
What's the induction
step look like?
I'm going to--
I get to choose.
I could either assume ih of n
minus 1 and prove of ih of n.
Or I'm going to assume if of
n and prove ih of n plus 1.
So we want to show ih of n
plus 1, assuming ih of n.
Cool.
So the key thing is we get
to assume this is true.
The strong induction
says if this, then this.
So we're assuming the if part.
We're assuming that
if this implication.
And this thing here
is exactly ih of n.
So this says ih of
n implies P of n.
So we know ih of
That's what we get to assume
in our theorem statement here.
And we just assumed
that ih of n is true.
Therefore, P of n is true.
But P of n was not what
we wanted to prove.
We wanted to prove
ih of n plus 1.
So what is ih of n plus 1?
Let's just expand out
this definition here.
It is P of 0 or dot, dot,
dot, or P of n minus 1
or P of n because of
incremented n by 1.
This no longer ends
at P of n minus 1.
It now ends at P of n.
But this is almost
what we had before.
This is the induction
hypothesis of n.
That's this part, or P of n.
That's just a
formula manipulation.
And this we assumed is
true, ih of n is true.
And P of n we just
proved is true.
Sorry.
I wrote over here, but
I meant and everywhere.
This is and, and.
See?
Even professors get the
V's and wedges upside down.
So I wrote it correctly here.
It's the and of P0
up to Pn minus 1.
Here we have the
and of P0 up to Pn.
And so this is ih of n, which we
assumed was true by induction,
and P of n, which we just
proved using one induction step.
Therefore, the and is also true.
And I believe that's the
end of the proof, all right?
I did a base case.
I did a step.
Oh, no, not quite the answer.
Sorry.
There's one more step here,
which I will put over here.
This is a good illustration
in not skipping steps.
What did we actually prove?
By induction, we proved
induction hypothesis of n
is true for all n.
So by induction, the
regular old induction axiom,
for all natural numbers n,
induction hypothesis of n
is true.
Induction hypothesis
of n is this thing.
But that's not what
we wanted to prove.
We wanted to prove P of
n is true for all of n.
But I can do some manipulation
to make that what I want.
So this is like saying
for all n, let's see.
Actually, probably
this is nicer.
For all natural numbers,
ih of n plus 1 is true, OK?
This is a shift.
It's actually a weaker shift.
This includes ih of 0.
This should not be
greater than or equal to.
This should be an element of.
This includes 0.
This doesn't.
This starts at 1,
and it goes upwards.
But this is nice.
So this implies this, right?
This is what we've shown.
This is a weaker
statement because I just
threw away ih of 0. ih of 0
wasn't interesting anyway.
ih of 1 includes
inside of it-- so it's
an and of a bunch of things.
But then the last
term is P of n.
If I take ih of n plus 1, the
last term in it is P of n.
So it's also anded,
but if the and is true,
then every term is true.
And so, therefore, P
of n is true for all n.
So this is a final cleanup.
After we did induction,
we didn't quite
get the statement
we wanted because we
used a different induction
hypothesis than just P.
And then we needed to show
that implied P of n for all n.
But it works.
Cool.
So now there should
be no question
about why strong
induction is true,
assuming you believe this proof.
You can draw a diagram.
It's a little trickier to do.
Maybe I will show you in
my handwritten notes here.
Here is a block diagram
for strong induction.
It's harder to draw because
you depend on so many things.
When I apply the
fourth step here,
when I want to conclude P of 4,
I assume all the previous P's.
So P0, P1, P2, P3, they
all feed into this box.
In the beginning,
it's very similar.
I apply a step, I get P of 0.
Then I apply that
P of 0 to a step.
I get P of 1.
But then, as I proceed,
I'm feeding more and more
Pi's into the step, and it
gives me one more Pi, OK?
So it's a much more
complicated diagram
of what's going
on under the hood,
but from a usage standpoint,
it only helps you.
When you're trying
to prove P of n,
you don't just get to
assume P of n minus 1.
You get to assume all the
Pi's where i is less than n.
I forgot one part of the Four
Color Theorem story, which
was when I was growing up, I
read a reprint of this article
by Martin Gardner,
which turned out
to be published on
April Fools, but I
didn't know it at the time.
And in 1975, there was no proof
of the Four Color Theorem.
Appel and Haken
was one year later.
So at this point he published
a joke saying, in fact,
McGregor found this map,
which requires five colors.
I remember sitting there trying
to color it with four colors
and always failing.
I was like, oh, my gosh.
Four Color Theorem isn't true.
Or Four Color Conjecture, as
it was called then, isn't true.
Isn't that amazing?
But it was all a lie.
In fact, you can
four-color that map.
But it's a very funny article
if you want to read it.
It's in the lecture notes,
or part of it is there.
All sorts of crazy things like,
oh, it turns out, if you take e
and you raise it to pi
times square root of 163,
the result is an integer.
[LAUGHTER]
It's not true, but all
sorts of crazy things.
Also, chess has a
crazy winning move.
And-- anyway, let's
relive the youth.
All right, I think
I'd like to, yeah,
show you some examples
of strong induction.
But maybe first I should
show you a template
for applying induction,
strong induction.
We'll repeat some of the
things that I've said,
but I think it's good
to have it concrete.
So here is a template.
Suppose you want
to prove something
is true for all natural numbers.
So for all natural
numbers n, P of n is true.
Then here's what the proof
will look like by proof
by strong induction.
So generally, we're assuming
P of k for all k less than n.
And then we want to show P of n.
Or you could shift
the numbers by one,
but this is my preferred
way of thinking about it.
Usually, we prove this by cases,
which is the method we just saw.
This is why we're pairing proof
by cases with strong induction.
How do we prove P of n?
Well, it might depend.
Often, we have some base
cases where n is small.
So maybe we have
to prove P of 0.
Maybe we have to prove P of 1.
Who knows?
Let's say up to P of little
b are the base cases.
Maybe you have to prove those
specially for some reason.
Then we do an induction step.
So I'll say by cases here.
Induction step we
get to assume n
is bigger than b because we
just proved 0 up to b manually.
And then we need to prove,
in those scenarios, P of n
is true because reasons.
But the big thing here
is we get to assume,
in these reasons we get to
use P0, P1, up to P n minus 1.
So that's the big win.
And in the base cases, you
also get to assume this.
But for example, when you're
proving P0 you don't really get
to assume anything because
there are no smaller Pi's.
So often, you have
to do these specially
because the induction
step assumes somehow
that n is bigger than 0.
Sometimes you get lucky, you
just need the induction step.
But usually you need base cases.
Let's see some examples.
And this will
become much clearer.
So let's play a game
called item stacking.
Or it's really unstacking.
So this is unstacking game.
So we're going to start
with one stack of n,
and then a move
splits a stack of S
bigger than 1 items into two
stacks with a items in one
and b items in the other.
And you get to choose
these numbers a and b,
but you need conservation.
So a plus b has to
equal S. And we also
don't want 0 height stacks.
So we need a at least
one and b at least one.
And so you get to
choose a and b however
you want so long as there's at
least one item in each stack.
So let's take a
physical example.
I've got lots of blocks
here, but I have no audience.
So we're just going
to demo this myself.
In real life, this is actually--
this was a snow day at MIT,
and so we're recording
after the fact.
So all the students--
MIT students have seen it.
This is specially
for you at OCW.
So when we do a move from S--
so this is-- we have
a stack of size S,
and we convert it into a stack
of size a and a stack of size b.
We get a times b points.
That's just the definition
of the game, a times
b points when you split
it into a stack of size a
and a stack of size b.
So how should I maximize
my score in this game?
What's the best strategy?
The game ends when
all your stacks
have size 1 because
you can't make
a move on a stack of one item.
It has to be greater
than 1 items.
So let's try.
Here I have a stack
of five blocks.
And one thing-- maybe I'll
try to split it roughly
in the middle.
So now-- here, I'll
rotate this so you can see
how it blocks a little bigger.
These are five blocks.
I split like this.
So that's a group of
2 and a group of 3.
Product of 2 times 3 is 6.
I can do this level
of arithmetic.
So 6 is our total so far.
When I split this one,
I get one more point.
That's 7.
When I split this one,
doesn't matter how I do it,
I get 2 times 1.
So that's two more points.
That's 9.
And when I split this
group, I get one more point.
That's 10.
OK.
So one approach
gives me 10 points.
What if-- another
natural strategy.
That was like splitting
in the middle.
Another natural strategy is I
just take one off each time.
So if I take one off
here, I get 4 points.
If I take one more off,
I get 3 more points.
That's 7.
4 plus 3 is 7.
I take one more
off, I get 2 points.
That's 9.
I take one more off.
That's one point.
That's 10.
Huh.
10 points that way, 10
points the other way as well?
Maybe there's a theorem here.
Maybe no matter what
I do, I get 10 points.
Well, that won't be true.
But for five blocks I
will always get 10 points.
For 6 blocks I will always get--
I don't know--
15.
Some more points.
It turns out it doesn't matter
what strategy you follow,
you always get the same
number of points for a given
initial stack of size n.
Let's prove that with
strong induction.
OK.
So theorem is for all natural
numbers, every strategy
for this game starting with
the stack, one stack of n items
scores--
magic formula is n
times n minus 1 over 2.
So that's the theorem.
And we're going to prove
it by strong induction
in the straightforward way.
So our induction hypothesis is
going to be exactly the theorem
statement for a particular n.
So I'm going to highlight
this statement, everything
except the quantifier.
And I'll call that P of n.
So what I wanted to prove is
for all natural numbers n P of n
is true.
And so that's just going to
be our induction hypothesis.
We're going to plug that
into this template here.
Assume that P of k is true
for all k less than n,
and then prove P of n is true.
So let's just try to do that.
So what I would normally
write here is assume true--
assume that my theorem is true.
Assume P of n is true.
Sorry.
P of k is true for
all k less than n.
I would say assume
true for all smaller n.
OK.
We need to do something
with the game.
We start with a pile of size n.
Let's just think
about the first move.
First move is something.
It takes our pile of
size n, and it splits it
into some piles a and b.
So we don't know what it is.
We don't know what a and b are,
but we can give them a name.
This has to work no
matter what a and b are.
But let's say consider
first move, which we know
we start with a pile of size n.
And we produce piles
of size a and b.
And again, a plus b equals n,
and a and b are at least 1.
But otherwise, we don't
know what a and b are.
OK.
So we go down here.
So we now have a pile of size
a, and we have a pile of size b.
Again, we don't know
how big they are,
but they are smaller than b.
So I want to claim we
are left with two piles.
Or we can really think of those
as two completely separate
games, a and b.
We're going to get some
points from splitting up.
points from splitting up b.
They sum together.
But these piles don't really
interact from here on.
We got a times b points
from this first step.
We're going to get some points
from the pile of size a.
We're going to get some
points to the pile of size b.
How many points do we get?
Well, in fact, our
induction hypothesis
will tell us because a and
b are strictly less than n.
Why?
Because a plus b equals n,
and a and b are at least 1.
So there's at least
1 in each of a and b.
And so the remainder must
be strictly less than n.
If there's one in a, then
there'll be n minus 1 in b.
If there's two in a, there'll
be n minus 2 in b, in all cases
less than n.
Because a and b are
less than n, they're
not necessarily n minus 1.
So we couldn't just
use regular induction.
But they're less than n.
And so by strong induction,
by strong induction,
we know that P of a is
true, and P of b is true.
We wrote that up here, some
P of k for all k less than n.
So a and b are less than n,
so P of a is true, and P of b
is true.
So that means, from the pile of
size a we get a times a minus 1
over 2 points.
From the a pile we get b
times b minus 1 over 2 points
from the b pile.
And then, of course,
we got a times b points
from the first move.
And so now we just
need to do some algebra
and add up all these points.
So the total number
of points that we get
is a times b plus a
times a minus 1 over 2
plus b times b minus 1 over 2.
These two were by induction.
This was the first move.
And now let's just
put everything over 2.
So this is 2 times a times b
plus a squared minus a plus
b squared minus b all over 2.
And now, what do
I want to get to?
This is supposed to equal
n times n minus 1 over 2.
And what was n?
n was a plus b.
So what I'd really
like to show here
is a plus b times a
plus b minus 1 over 2.
That's my goal.
And what I need to do is
fill in the in-between.
But this is not too hard
because, let's see, I
see a times b here
and a times b here.
In fact, you can
just expand this out,
and you'll get exactly
the same thing here.
I think slightly more
intuitive is to see,
oh, look at this term,
this term, and this term.
That is a squared plus
2ab plus b squared.
That is a plus b squared.
And then we have a
minus a, minus b over 2.
But interject a rule in between.
We have a plus b squared
minus a plus b over 2.
And then these two
are the same thing.
I think that's pretty clear.
So cool.
We did some algebra,
and we just computed
what we get out of induction.
And then boom!
We get the answer n
times n minus 1 over 2.
And it works.
How did we know this
is the right answer?
We were just told
that by the theorem.
Probably, you would try
this for very small n
and make a conjecture.
Oh, it seems like it's n
times n minus 1 over 2.
Let's try to prove it.
And when you assume the right
thing, the proof just works.
And it's kind of magical.
And that's strong induction.
Again, we need a
strong induction here
because we need to assume what
we wanted for all smaller n
because we don't know
what a and b are.
This has to work for
all a and b less than n.
So luckily, strong
induction gives us that.
All right, I have
one more example
to tell you about, a slightly
more complicated version
of the same thing.
We're going to use
strong induction.
Don't need any of these.
So let's go.
This is the problem
called Beat Ordering.
I guess somewhat relevant today
because it was the Super Bowl.
But this is just about
any teams of games.
Sorry.
n teams in some game.
And setup is that every
two teams play a game,
and there are no ties.
One team wins, and
the other loses.
OK.
This is like friends
and strangers,
where it's either
one or the other.
But in this case,
it's asymmetric.
They're not both
happy or both sad.
One is happy, and one is sad.
OK.
This is what's called a
Round Robin tournament.
Most sports are
not played this way
unless a small number
of teams because it's
a lot of different teams.
It's actually n times
n plus 1 over 2 teams
games, which is a lot.
All right, so what
we would like is
what's called a beat ordering.
This is an ordering of the
teams T1, T2, up to Tn,
such that B1 beat--
sorry, T1, T for teams.
T1 beats T2.
T2 beat T3, and so on.
And Tn minus 1 beats Tn.
OK.
Let's draw a little example.
There's team rock, team
scissors, and team paper.
OK.
Paper beats rock.
Rock beats scissors.
Scissors beats paper.
OK.
This is a possible outcome
in a three-team tournament.
There's not necessarily
one best team here.
There is no best team.
But maybe paper and
rock play a game, And.
It happens that paper won.
Maybe rock plays
against scissors,
and it happens rock won.
And scissors played
against paper,
and it happens scissors won.
OK.
You can tell why I named
the teams this way.
Then one way I could
order these teams
is paper, rock, scissors
because paper beats rock.
Rock beats scissors.
OK.
So this is the input.
And this is my goal is to
produce an ordering like this.
But I need to do it for n
teams, not just for three.
So let's do strong induction
to prove that the theorem is
a beat ordering always exists.
OK.
Theorem.
And when I say this always
exists, what I really mean
is for all n and then for
all tournaments of size
n there exists a beat order.
OK.
There exists an
ordering of the n teams
such that the first one
beat the second one,
the second one beat the
third one, and so on.
I should say, for all
i Ti beat Ti plus 1.
So we claim this is true.
Proof by strong induction.
So we're going to assume
that this statement is true.
Namely, this statement
is true for smaller n.
And then we're going
to prove it for n.
OK.
Let's pick a team, any team.
Call it T. Then I'm
going to split everything
with respect to t.
So I'm going to define W
to be the set of teams that
win against T. So this is going
to be a set of all teams S
where S beat T. So this is
1 versus T. These teams win
versus T or 1 versus T. And L
is going to be the set of teams
that lose against T. So this is
the set of teams S where TBS.
So this is a loss versus T.
Then, intuitively,
what we'd like
to do is put the winners first,
then put T, then put the losers.
I claim that works, OK?
But how do I order the winners?
How do I order the losers?
Well, by induction.
I claim the size of W--
this vertical bar means
the size of the set--
is less than n.
And the size of L is less
than n because the size
of the winners plus the size
of the losers plus 1 equals n.
This is a 1.
Why?
Because every team is either
T, or they won against T,
or they lost against T. So this
is counting all of the teams.
There's T itself, the
ones that win against T,
the ones that lose against T.
Together, that is exactly n.
Every team is exactly
one of these categories.
And there's a plus 1 here.
And all of these
are non-negative.
Here, W and L might be 0,
but there's this plus 1.
That means both W and L
are strictly less than n.
So the induction
applies to them.
So by induction.
This thing is true for
any tournament of size W
there exists a bit ordering of
W. For every tournament of size
L there exists a beat ordering
of L. So we get a beat ordering.
We get two of them, really.
Let's call it W1, W2, dot, dot,
dot W size of W. This is for--
this is an ordering of capital
W. And we get L1, L2, dot,
dot, dot, L size of L as a
beat ordering of capital L.
And then, we concatenate.
So we claim W1, dot,
dot, dot W size of w,
then T, then L1, dot,
dot, dot L size of L
is a beat ordering
of all n teams.
Again, this is all the teams.
All the teams either won
against T, or they are T,
or they lost against t.
And the idea is
this part is beat.
W1 beats W2, W2
beats W3, and so on,
by induction because
this is a beat ordering
of capital W. Over here, this
is a beat ordering of capital L.
And so by induction
all these are OK.
L1 beat L2.
L2 beat so on, dot, dot,
dot beat L size of L.
The only things we need to
check are these two commas.
We need to check
that W sub big W--
W sub size of W beats
T, and T beat L1.
Why are those true?
By our definition of W
and L. Everything in W
beat T. So this is by
the definition of W. We
know that all of these beat T.
So in particular,
this one beat T.
And we know by the
definition of L
all of these teams lost
against T. In other words,
T beats all of these teams.
And in particular, T beat L1.
And so by combining all these
beat statements together,
we know that this entire
thing is a beat ordering.
Each item beats the
one right after it.
So it's a little
more complicated.
But again, we're d quite often
with strong induction proofs,
you apply induction twice.
You have some
problem with size n.
You split it into two parts.
In general, you might
split it into many parts.
Then you recursively solve the
two parts or the many parts,
as long as they're
strictly smaller than n.
By induction, we
know they work out.
By strong induction,
we know they work out.
You take those solutions and
you combine them in some way.
Here, we concatenated
with T in the middle.
Over here, we summed them up.
We summed up the
number of points
we got in each one plus
the number of points
we got in the first step.
And in general, you
combine them in some way,
and you prove that the thing you
want to prove holds for size n.
And then you get your theorem.
So that is the power
of strong induction.
Thanks.